in the beginning there was the big bang
and it was an explosion a real biggie
and like any explosion
it burst in all directions only in its
case
giving birth to all galaxies and stars
in them
except the universe we see is relatively
flat
it seems like something doesn't quite
add up here
we're used to thinking that the universe
was born in the big bang
but we also forget that it's just a
theory and just like any other theory
about the beginning of everything
the big bang theory has its flaws for
example
we're pretty sure that there is five
times more dark matter in the universe
than any visible or tangible manner but
we still haven't found any of it
and without dark matter science can
explain how the matter that formed after
the big bang
could organize itself into galaxy
clusters with vast empty voids between
them
another huge problem with the big bang
is that we have
absolutely no idea why it happened in
the first place
and what possibly could have caused it
was there another universe that was
constricting into a dot
before exploding once again was there a
parent universe
that simply made a parallel reality of
itself
or was it a mysterious quantum force
fields
interacting with each other in some
extreme and explosive way
we don't know and probably have no way
of figuring that out
[Music]
and while i wouldn't personally try to
call out scientists for these problems
because they simply show how little we
know there are still
other problems that can't be ignored
like the fact that the big bang didn't
explode in a normal fashion
and instead produce the universe that is
as far as we know
flat even if it has the slightest
curvature
that's not a sphere-shaped universe you
would have expected from the big bang
scientists largely agree that the
universe is flat
and everyone learns evidence to that in
school
we all know that if you draw a triangle
the sum of its angles will always be 180
degrees and if you draw two parallel
lines
they won't ever come together or break
apart they will always be parallel
no matter how far they go these two
facts are true
unless you're drawing triangles and
lines on a sphere instead of a flat
surface
for example if you try to draw two
parallel lines on a globe as meridians
naturally should be
they will eventually cross each other
the same goes for triangles
the sum of their angles won't be equal
to 180 degrees
so if the universe came from an
explosion it should somewhat resemble a
sphere
right instead no matter what size
triangles you may draw between different
points in the universe
their angles will still give 180 degrees
when summed up
and photons of light that go parallel in
a straight line
will stay parallel on the whole journey
almost
here's another quirk related to photons
to be completely fair
they wouldn't go into line in the first
place if the universe were
curved photons are known to change their
path
being pulled by a gravitational force of
nearby objects
this effect is called gravitational
lensing
everything that has mass produces it
even you do but on such a minuscule
level
that it almost won't even matter in
observation
and then compare your body to something
as huge as a planet
then a star a galaxy
and how about a whole galaxy cluster now
you get the picture
speaking of pictures the gravitational
lensing is most obvious in photos of
distant galaxies
for their light to come to us it has to
go through several clusters of other
galaxies between us
and them the resulting photos are
distorted
galaxies in them always have weird
shapes as if someone messed around with
a photo in an image editor
in reality these distant galaxies look
like every other galaxy in the universe
but the image is distorted because their
light was curved by the gravitational
lensing
but as sloppy and distorted as these
photos are
they still prove that the universe is
flat because in the curved universe
such photos would be almost
incomprehensible at all
well case closed the universe is flat
roll the credits
[Music]
yeah well it's never like that in the
ever-changing world of science
there is always some new evidence or
research that ruins every theory built
before it
this new curve ball released in 2019 in
nature astronomy scientific journal
says that the light coming from the
beginning of the universe is
too curved to consider the universe flat
after all
this ancient imprint of the youth of the
universe is not the light you're used to
it's something called cosmic microwave
background
or cmb it's a faint trail of the
electromagnetic radiation
seen everywhere in the universe as a
background noise
most clearly detectable in a microwave
radio spectrum
this radiation is also called relic
radiation
because it almost literally comes from
the past
dating back as far as 380 000 years
after the big bang itself in 2018
data was collected from the planck
satellite built specifically to observe
the cmb
this data showed the abnormal lensing of
the faint line
for a year this curve of light was just
considered an unresolved mystery
but then came the theory that could
explain it the only problem
is that it also considers the universe
to be an inflating orb
rather than a flat disc this
hypothetical shape of the universe
was named the closed universe the closed
universe model can
explain the distortion in the planck's
satellite's newly obtained data
but it's still inconsistent with lots of
other evidence
that tells us the universe is flat an
alternative opinion on this data
is that it's just a glitch in otherwise
stable work of the satellite itself
for the moment there's much more proof
to the flat universe model being true
than to the closed universe but until
the inconsistency in planck satellites
data is thoroughly inspected
we are left to wonder if everything we
knew about the universe
is not that reliable anymore
well to figure out the shape of the
whole universe is the ultimate task
and it's okay if science stumbles on
something unexpected and mind-boggling
every once in a while
at least there are a lot of relatively
smaller things we're already pretty sure
about
like no one will challenge the fact that
our galaxy is a flat spiral
that's a funny one in the same 2019
two different studies were published
that proved our galaxy is not
flat but warped and twisted both of
these studies are a part of the most
ambitious
mapping project ever it uses data from
six
different survey systems catalogs during
their collective work
astronomers found that some stars are
not in the place they should be
if the milky way galaxy is supposed to
be flat
it's not that unusual for spiral
galaxies to be a bit twisted around the
edges
but astronomers rarely voice the
possibility that the milky way is one of
them
given that it's pretty hard to guess the
shape of something that is more than one
000 light years big and contains at
least 400 billion stars in it
no wonder our galaxy still surprises us
the study used information about
positions of very special stars
called cepheids these stars are from 100
to 10
000 times brighter than our sun and they
pulse
regularly and often enough to be
extremely useful in continuous research
during observation of cepheids it became
evident that the outer parts of the
milky way spiral
can't quite keep pace with the galaxy's
rotation
but they're still being dragged by inner
part of the spiral
this leads to the change in their shape
and gradual formation of these twists
around the edge of the galaxy well my
mind is now properly boggled
all i can say is that i like milky ways
especially when they're frozen